In the following series of videos, we'll
give a formal treatment of asymptotic
notation, in particular big-Oh notation, as
well as work through a number of examples.
Big-Oh notation concerns functions defined
on the positive integers, we'll call it T(n)
We'll pretty much always have the
same semantics for T(n). We're gonna be
concerned about the worst-case running
time of an algorithm, as a function of the
input size, n. So, the question I wanna
answer for you in the rest of this video,
is, what does it mean when we say a
function, T(n), is big-Oh of f(n). Or
hear f(n) is some basic function, like
for example n log n. So I'll give you a
number of answers, a number of ways of, to
think about what big-Oh notation really
means. For starters let's begin with an
English definition. What does it mean for
a function to be big-Oh of f(n)? It means
eventually, for all sufficiently large
values of n, it's bounded above by a
constant multiple of f(n). Let's think
about it in a couple other ways. So next
I'm gonna translate this English
definition into picture and then I'll
translate it into formal mathematics. So
pictorially you can imagine that perhaps
we have T(n) denoted by this blue
functions here. And perhaps f(n) is
denoted by this green function here, which
lies below T(n). But when we double f(n), we get a function that eventually
crosses T(n) and forevermore is larger
than it. So in this event, we would say
that T(n) indeed is a Big-Oh of f(n).
The reason being that for all sufficiently
large n, and once we go far enough out right
on this graph, indeed, a constant
multiple times of f(n), twice f(n), is an upper bound of T(n).
So finally, let me give you a actual
mathematical definition that you could use
to do formal proofs. So how do we say, in
mathematics, that eventually it should be
bounded above by a constant multiple of f(n)? We see that there exists two
constants, which I'll call c and n0. So
that T(n) is no more than c times f(n)
for all n that exceed or equal n0.
So, the role of these two constants is to
quantify what we mean by a constant
multiple, and what we mean by sufficiently
large, in the English definition. c
obviously quantifies the constant multiple
of f(n), and n0 is quantifying
sufficiently large, that's the threshold
beyond which we insist that, c times f(n) is an upper-bound on T(n). So, going
back to the picture, what are c and n0? Well, c, of course, is just going to
be two. And n0 is the crossing point.
So we get to where two f(n). And T(n)
cross, and then we drop the acentode.
This would be the relative value of n0
in this picture, so that's the formal
definition, the way to prove that
something's bigger of f(n) you
exhibit these two constants c and n0
and it better be the case that for all n at least
n0, c times f(n) upper-bounds T(n).
One way to think about it if you're trying
to establish that something is big-Oh of
some function it's like you're playing a
game against an opponent and you want to
prove that. This inequality here holds and
your opponent must show that it doesn't
hold for sufficiently large n you have to
go first your job is to pick a strategy in
the form of a constant c and a constant n0 and your opponent is then allowed to
pick any number n larger than n0 so the
function is big-Oh of f(n) if and only if you
have a winning strategy in this game. If
you can up front commit to constants c and
n0 so that no matter how big of an n
your opponent picks, this inequality holds
if you have no winning strategy then it's
not big-Oh of f(n) no matter what C and n0
you choose your opponent can always
flip this in equality. By choosing a
suitable, suitable large value of n. I
want to emphasis one last thing which is
that these constants, what do I mean by
constants. I mean they are independent of
n. And so when you apply this definition,
and you choose your constant c and
n0, it better be that n does not appear
anywhere. So C should just be something
like a thousand or a million. Some
constant independent of n. So those are a
bunch of way to think about big-Oh
notation. In English, you wanna have it
bound above for sufficiently large numbers
n. I'm showing you how to translate that
into mathematics that give you a pictorial
representation. And also sort of a game
theoretic way to think about it. Now,
let's move on to a video that explores a
number of examples.